Okay, thank you for joining us for this session. So it's my pleasure to welcome
Hannah Frick, who is a senior software engineer at Posit. She's on the
tidymodels team and holds a PhD in statistics and worked in interdisciplinary
research and data science consistency. She's a co-founder also of the R-Ladies
global. The floor is yours. Thank you. Thank you. Hello. Yes, so I work on the
tidymodels team at Posit, so it is probably no surprise that I'm also going
to be talking about tidymodels. But we are going to be talking about time-to-event
data a little bit before that, because that makes sense, right? So what is that?
I saw a bunch of people coming in just now. If you were here for the previous
talk, you're gonna recognize elements from Mirko's nice talk here, but I'm
gonna be zooming out a little bit and taking you along on a journey. So time-to-
event. I brought a data set with customer churn, where the event is your customer
churns, and I am NOT an English native speaker. I had to learn that that means
the customer leaves. So that's the event. It could be pretty broad, though. It is
not always death is the key message, and if you hear survival analysis, you think
medical research for most of the cases, but we're taking this more general. Our
latest example data set is pet adoption. So time-to-pet adoption, slightly
different in speed than time-to-death. But here we're gonna use this data set
for a customer churn. You have the tenure, which covers the time, and the
churn variable, which is the factor whether they are still a customer or not.
Yes, so coming from the situation of you have that data set in front of you, what
might you want to do with it? Likely some predictions in my setting, but what
exactly? For once, you might want to predict how long somebody is going to
stay as a customer, but you might also be interested in knowing who is likely to
churn, who's likely to stop being a customer. So we're gonna be looking at
both of these questions. Let's take the first one, and how long? That's a duration,
that's a numeric thing. You might walk up to this and be like, yeah, I'll do a
regression on it. So why don't we just use that time? If we want to predict the
time, let's use the time and use that as our response. The slight catch here is
that this is the time you observe. This isn't necessarily time-to-event, right?
There's no notion of event if you just take the time. Because what we actually
have is not just this, but we do have a customer that stays a while and then
eventually leaves. That's the event, that's like the bottom line. But you also
have two other customers that came on a little later, and they're still customers
now when you want to make your analysis. So if you just take that time and model
that and say it is time-to-event, then you implicitly also say everything is an
event, right? And the customers that are still with you at this point, you pretend
they just left. So you're sort of underestimating their tenure, right? You
get something, but not quite what you want is the key takeaway. You could argue
like, okay, well if these are not complete, I'm gonna remove them. But you're also
gonna bias your analysis if you do that. You might be tempted to say, okay, then
I'll wait until I got everything. Also not always practical. Sometimes you need
answers yet, and in this example you hopefully will never be in the situation
that all your customers finally left before you start modeling, right? So that
part is not quite where you want to use regression analysis. The other question
has a similar not quite right feel to it. So if you look at it and you're like,
okay, well I have a binary event. Why don't I model it as that? Yes, you can, but
the time aspect doesn't just disappear. If you just use this, you're leaving that
out, and you're essentially modeling who is likely to stop being a customer while
we observe them. That's not really what you want to be doing, right? Maybe close,
but maybe not quite, because that time frame of how long you observed them can
be quite different, and if somebody showed up and signed up to your business
a day ago, that's different than if they've been around for 10 years. And
that doesn't capture it. So to put these things together, the quite obvious thing
that is still easy to ignore is that time to event data inherently has two
aspects. The time and the event status. And you might have what we call censoring.
That was sort of the that the event hasn't happened yet. So that's
incomplete data, but it is not missing data, and that's different, and you would
like to use it for as long as you can for as much as you can. And regression
and classification are great, but they model one of these aspects separately,
and they don't really account properly for the other aspect that you have. I am
most definitely not here to scold you if you have done this, because we famously
know all models are wrong. I'm just here to make the invitation that there's
something that gets you a little closer, and that thing is survival analysis. So
despite the very medical sounding name, this is applicable in a lot of cases. And
the interesting part about it that it can simultaneously consider if an event
happens, and when that event happens. So that's my invitation for you to look at
that methodology, even if you're looking at something that is very much non
medical. The other part I'm talking about is tidy models, unsurprisingly. It is a
framework for modeling and machine learning using tidyverse principles. So
what does that mean? It means it has infrastructure and cover for the
predictive modeling workflow, so we have something for resampling, there's code
for pre-processing in a very elegant way, there's the models, there are the
performance metrics, and there's something to orchestrate all of that
into tuning models. That's the core of it, but that's not all. So it is
extendable. We have done that a couple of times, and our community has done
that in parts. So there is specialized stuff for spatial data, thanks to our
then intern Mike Mahoney. There's some more specialized methods for tuning,
thanks to Max. For recipes, there are extensions for text data, and unbalanced
data, and factors with a whole lot of levels, and then the bulk of extensions
sits around the models, where you can get specialized models for different tasks.
The one I'm going to point out here is the censored package, because that holds
the parts for survival analysis and censored regression. So that was a whole
bunch of lovely, very beautiful colorful hex stickers, but the point is that if
you do predictive modeling, there's a whole lot of things you have to do that
aren't actually focused on your modeling question. All of the resampling, and then
doing your preprocessing, and your model fitting on the right resamples, and then
predicting, and evaluating it, and calculating the performance metrics, and
aggregating all of that. You do that every time, but that is not what really
interests you in this case. So a framework takes that off your plate. That
provides the infrastructure, and you can use the parts, and you can focus on what's
really interesting. And Tidy Models is built with Tidyverse design principles,
so if you're comfortable with the Tidyverse, you should feel at home with
Tidy Models as well. It sort of follows the same care in APIs, and consistency in
function naming, gives you like a unified front of it, so you don't have to
necessarily learn individual packages. If you're sitting more in a place where you
would like to give different ones a go to find out what fits your data, if
you're not having very, very specialized concerns and modeling implications. So
that is what we try to make easier for you, so you can focus your attention on
what does actually fit well here, what can I get by making clever features, and
so on. So that was general Tidy Models. Survival analysis now works across of
this, and it sort of pops up its head in specific places. That is, for one, the
models, rather obvious. It is in the prediction types, and because of that,
consequently, also in the metrics. So I've listed some of them here. These look
very familiar to the previous talk. They often come up in class, most of them come
up in classification as well, but these are like the survival specific versions.
But that is just sort of the specificity here. The offer is to use it
together with the rest. So like Tidy Models for survival analysis is Tidy
Models, essentially. And you can go combine the different elements of the
framework, so you could be using text pre-processing to make predictors out of
that for your survival analysis model, and sort of put the building blocks
together. But it wouldn't be user if there wasn't code, right? So let's do a
minimal version of this. Welcome back to Customer Churn Dataset. We're gonna load
Tidy Models, we're gonna load the extension package for it, and the first
thing we're doing is not Tidy Models at all, but we're gonna make our response
variable, the outcome, that's a serve object. That is what captures both of the
aspects. The time here in the tenure variable, and the event status, which is
here in the churn variable. And then we're gonna dip into our familiar
workflow. We're gonna make a split into training and testing data. We are gonna
make a very minimal recipe here. This one just removes predictors that have zero
variance because they don't tell us anything, and I'm keeping it short to
keep it on one slide. Where it does get survival specific is the model. So this
is a parametric survival model. There are other options. They all have a mode
censored regression. So it could be a Cox model, a portion of hazards model. It
could be a tree-based model, like a decision tree or random forest. Those
work for other things as well. So that's why you have to declare that it's
censored regression. And we're gonna use the survival package to actually
estimate this. And that was like the part where it's different to
quote-unquote before. And now we're sort of back with the general workflow. We're
taking these two things, combining it into one that we call a workflow, just to
make sure they get estimated together. And in our case, we're just gonna fit one
model on the training data, because I would like to show you that you can
answer both of your initial questions with that one model. You don't have to
build one regression model to answer the first question, and a classification
model to answer the second question, and try to work out what works best for each
of these. You can focus on just making one. And you can get predictions for how
long somebody is going to stay as a customer. That is the type time that
refers to the survival time. And for the second question, who is likely to stop
being a customer? Or the inverse, who's likely to stick around? That is the
prediction type survival or survival probability. That you need to evaluate at
certain times, because survival probability overall, unfortunately, zero.
So not very interesting to model. But you can answer questions like, who's likely to
still be a customer after 12 months or 24 months? And it gives you this lovely
little table, because you get two prediction values per customer. This is a
list column, and it has little tuples in it. If you pull one of these out, you can
see it has like evaluation time, and then the probability of survival that
corresponds to it. So that is sort of like the quick introduction to showing you
that part. I'm going to forego tuning the whole thing, evaluating it, and so on.
Because really, what I want you to take away right now from this, is that sensor
regression lets you use all the information you have together at once. So
you're doing one model, it includes the time, includes the event status, it
includes your event, and it includes also your censored observations, and you make
use of them for as long as you can. And the other part is that Tidy Models lets
you do this within a well-designed framework for predictive modeling. So
there is always more, and we have a bunch of articles on tidymodels.org
slash learn, that have a survival analysis tag, that includes a case study that
really takes you through all of this, like more than this sort of taster that
I've put up here. So that includes fitting a model, evaluating it, moving on,
trying different models, tuning those models, and then like making your final
choice, and then being able to predict with that one. And the other thing I want
to point out here for learning more, is that we did a tutorial two days ago for
survival analysis with Tidy Models, so if you would like to see that, you're also
welcome to check that out. And that is me. Thank you.
Thank you, Hanna. So we have time for questions.
Thanks for the talk. It's more of a remark, and I would like to hear your
opinion on it, because Tidy Models seems like a very comprehensive framework, with
a lot of development effort going into it. And when I look at one particular
aspect, the parsnip I think it's called, the library that implements the modeling,
then I wonder, wouldn't it make sense to kind of outwork that part, like the
model implementation, the number crunching, that needs to happen in every
model, and in every language. So if the community could agree to implement
these particular aspects of the whole pipeline, for example the likelihood
function, in a generic API that could be called from different languages,
couldn't this reduce development efforts considerably? I'm not sure whether I
could state the idea clearly, but maybe you could comment on it. So, I don't have
to repeat the question, because it has a mic. Okay, do you mean like something
generic, like an optimizer, like Optin? No, just the model implementation. For
example, if you have a linear model, and you follow the likelihood
paradigm, you have to specify a likelihood function, and this function
gets called over and over again in an optimization routine. It can be
either Bayesian or maximum likelihood estimation. And in my perspective, it
would make sense to write this function, for example in C++, and then it could be
used in tidy models, but it could also be used in Python. I see your point.
I mean, my impression would be that that doesn't generalize all that well, because
the likelihood captures the specificities of a model, and it is
hard to generalize that. What we follow at the moment is that we trust
researchers, and in part statisticians, for loads of them to get that
implementation right, because they are the experts on those models, and they
know them in and out, and they know how to like get that part right. And then we
do the part where we let you move between options. Where we try to help out
and make offers for people to implement stuff in a more general way is the
hardhat package, which sort of does some of the shared elements. It doesn't do
specifically the likelihood, because that is often so model-specific, but it
gives you like a scaffolding where you can put that in, and then there's
infrastructure for, say, having a formula interface to your optimization problem,
or having a matrix interface, and that kind of thing, and giving you some sort
of like hopefully cozy places to make your predictions and take some of that
infrastructure problem away for people who might not know R in and out, or sort
of starting out and have a focus on the statistical elements and stuff, so that
we get good parts from both, basically.
Thank you. We have, yeah, one quick question.
Thank you, Hannah, for the very nice presentation. I have two questions, maybe
very quick ones. The first one is, how does it scale the model? Like, can I go
in with a really big data set with millions of rows, and will it work? And
second one would be, do you also have some tidy models module for explainability?
Okay, so first question, how fast does it go? That has a two-part answer. The core
is how fast is the actual model implementation, and that depends on the
people who develop the package, and how much they pay attention to this, or what
allows them to do it or not. And the other part is sort of like, can you
paralyze it and throw some computing power at it? And tidy models does have,
like, uses foreach as the way to register a backend, and sort of like
moving to future as the backend. So you can paralyze it that way. It is meant so
that if you only have to do the pre-processing once and then fit all the
models, you don't have to always do pre-processing and modeling. Sort of, you
try to cut out the repeated pre-processing. So it does take care of
this where it can, but obviously we can't make the innermost part, the model
fit faster. And the second was explainability. There are explainers for
tidy models that our country, like Daleks, does a lot and also works with tidy
models, so it's not us who maintains that, but it works on tidy models. And we have
recently put work into implementing fairness metrics, which is not exactly
explainability, but sort of goes into the direction, so I thought I'd mention that.
There's more on a tidy model, sorry, tidyverse blog on fairness if you're
interested in that.
Okay, thank you. So thank, again, Anna for the presentation.